1. API Design Overview
For this project, I went with a layered architecture to keep the business logic separate from the data storage. I used JAX-RS to build out
the endpoints and handled the data using a DAO (Data Access Object) pattern. Everything is stored in-memory using a singleton Storage class,
which makes the API fast and easy to test without needing a full database setup.

The structure is set up hierarchically: Rooms are the main containers, Sensors live inside those rooms, and Readings are nested under the sensors.
I also built a Discovery endpoint using HATEOAS, so the API actually tells the client what they can do next by providing links in the JSON responses.
It makes the whole system feel way more professional and easier to navigate.




2. Build and Launch Instructions
To get the project up and running on your machine, just follow these steps:

Clone the Repo: Open your terminal and run:
git clone https://github.com/HussainBhatoo/SmartCampusAPI.git

Import to NetBeans: Open NetBeans and select "Open Project." Navigate to the folder you just cloned. Since it’s a Maven project, NetBeans will handle
the dependencies for you.

Build it: Right-click the project and hit "Clean and Build". This generates the .war file you’ll need for deployment.

Run the Server: Make sure you have a Payara or GlassFish server set up in your IDE. Right-click the project and click "Run".

Test the Base URL: Once it’s deployed, you can reach the API at:
http://localhost:8080/SmartCampusAPI/api/v1



3. Sample cURL Commands
Here are five commands you can use to test the main features of the API. I’ve ordered them so you can see the full flow from discovery to deletion:

Step 1: Check the Discovery Link
curl -X GET http://localhost:8080/SmartCampusAPI/api/v1

Step 2: Create a Room (R1)
curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"id":"R1", "name":"Main Lab"}' http://localhost:8080/SmartCampusAPI/api/v1/rooms

Step 3: Link a Sensor (S1) to that Room
curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"id":"S1", "type":"CO2"}' http://localhost:8080/SmartCampusAPI/api/v1/rooms/R1/sensors

Step 4: Add a Reading to the Sensor
curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"id":"RD1", "value":450.0}' http://localhost:8080/SmartCampusAPI/api/v1/sensors/S1/readings

Step 5: Try to Delete the Room (Safety Logic Check)
curl -X DELETE http://localhost:8080/SmartCampusAPI/api/v1/rooms/R1




Questions:
Part 1 

1- Question: In your report, explain the default lifecycle of a JAX-RS Resource class. Is a new instance instantiated for every incoming request,
or does the runtime treat it as a singleton? Elaborate on how this architectural decision impacts the way you manage 
and synchronize your in-memory data structures (maps/lists) to prevent data loss or race conditions. 

 

In my implementation, the JAX-RS resource classes follow a per-request lifecycle, meaning the server creates a totally new instance of the class every time 
an HTTP request hits the endpoint. While this keeps things clean and isolated for the server, it actually created a bit of a challenge for my data storage. 
Since I’m not using a persistent database, any data stored in standard instance variables would just disappear the moment the request finished.
To get around this and prevent data loss, I had to use static collections (like my GenericDAO lists) to ensure the sensor and room data stayed in memory even
after the resource instance was destroyed. Using static structures like this meant I had to be careful about synchronization; since multiple requests might
try to access or modify the lists at the exact same time, I used static final lists to provide a consistent data entry point and help avoid race conditions
or threading issues during runtime. 

 

2-Question: Why is the provision of ”Hypermedia” (links and navigation within responses) considered a hallmark of advanced RESTful design (HATEOAS)?
How does this approach benefit client developers compared to static documentation? 

 

Providing hypermedia links (HATEOAS) in the Discovery endpoint is basically a hallmark of advanced RESTful design because it makes the API "self-explanatory."
Instead of the client developer having to constantly refer back to a static PDF or a documentation website to figure out the next URL, the API response itself
acts as a map. By including links like {"rooms": "/api/v1/rooms"}, I’m letting the client navigate the system dynamically. This is a huge benefit for developers
compared to static docs because it decouples the client from the server’s specific URL structure. If I ever need to change a path or version an endpoint,
I can update the link in the Discovery response, and any well-built client following those links won't break. It basically turns the API into something discoverable
and browseable rather than just a list of hard-coded strings. 

 

Part 2  

1- Question: When returning a list of rooms, what are the implications of returning only IDs versus returning the full room objects? Consider network bandwidth 
and client side processing 

When I was looking at whether to return just the room IDs or the full room objects in a list, it really came down to a trade-off between speed and convenience. 
If the API only sends back a list of IDs, the response is super small, which is great for saving network bandwidth. 
The downside is that it makes the API a bit "chatty"—the client developer then has to do a bunch of extra work, making a separate GET request for every single 
room just to see the details. I decided to return the full objects because it’s way more helpful for the client to get all the data in one shot without the 
extra processing. It’s a bit more data over the wire, but for the scale of this project, it makes the dev experience much smoother than having to loop through 
dozens of individual ID calls. 

 

2- Question: Is the DELETE operation idempotent in your implementation? Provide a detailed justification by describing what happens if a client mistakenly sends
the exact same DELETE request for a room multiple times. 

 

In my implementation, the DELETE operation is idempotent, which is basically the standard for RESTful services. This means that if a client sends the exact same
DELETE request for a room multiple times—maybe because of a network glitch or an accidental double-click—the final state of the server doesn't change after that
first successful call. The first time they send it, the server finds the room and removes it (as long as it passes the safety check I added to make sure it
doesn't have active sensors). If they send the same request again, the room is already gone, so the code just returns a 404 Not Found. Even though the response
code changes from a 204 or 200 to a 404, the data on the server stays exactly the same after that first delete. It’s a really important feature because it makes
the API much more resilient and prevents "double deletion" errors from messing with the system state. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Part 3 

1- Question: We explicitly use the @Consumes (MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON) annotation- on the POST method.
Explain the technical consequences if a client attempts to send data in a different format, such as text/plain or application/xml.
How does JAX-RS handle this mismatch? 

 

By adding @Consumes(MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON) to my POST method, I’m basically setting a hard rule for what the API will actually accept.
If a client tries to send data in a different format—like text/plain or application/xml—the technical consequence is that
JAX-RS will block the request immediately before it even hits my business logic.
It handles this mismatch by returning a 415 Unsupported Media Type error. This is honestly a lifesaver because it means I don't have to write
manual checks to see if the data is valid JSON; the framework handles the "gatekeeping" for me.
It keeps the communication between the client and server consistent and prevents the app from crashing because it's trying to parse a format
it wasn't designed to handle. 

 

2- Question: You implemented this filtering using @QueryParam. Contrast this with an alternative design where the type is part of the 
URL path(e.g., /api/vl/sensors/type/CO2). Why is the query parameter approach generally considered superior for filtering and searching 
collections? 

I decided to use the @QueryParam approach for filtering by sensor type (like ?type=CO2) because it's way more flexible than trying to build the type directly
into the URL path. If I had put the type in the path—like /sensors/type/CO2—it makes it look like "type" is its own specific resource, which isn't really the case.
In REST, the path should usually represent the actual "thing" you're looking at, while query parameters are meant for sorting or narrowing down that list.
Using query parameters also makes it a lot easier if I wanted to add more filters later, like searching by status or date, without creating a bunch of messy
and complicated URL combinations. It keeps the main endpoint clean and follows the standard way of handling searches in a professional API. 

 

 

 

 

Part 4 

1- Question: Discuss the architectural benefits of the Sub-Resource Locator pattern. How does delegating logic to separate classes help manage complexity in
large APIs compared to defining every nested path (e.g., sensors/{id}/readings/{rid}) in one massive controller class? 

Using the Sub-Resource Locator pattern (delegating the /readings path to a separate SensorReadingResource class) has some big architectural benefits, especially
when it comes to keeping the project organized. If I had tried to cram every single nested path—like rooms, sensors, and all their historical readings—into one
giant controller class, the code would have become a total mess and really hard to debug. By delegating the logic to separate classes, I’m basically following the
"Single Responsibility Principle." Each class only has to worry about its own specific part of the API. This makes the whole system much easier to manage as it 
grows, because if I need to change how readings are handled, I know exactly which file to go to without accidentally breaking the sensor or room logic. It just 
keeps the code cleaner, more modular, and way more readable. 

 

2- 

 

Part 5 

2- Question: Why is HTTP 422 often considered more semantically accurate than a standard 404 when the issue is a missing reference inside a valid JSON payload? 

 

When a client tries to POST a new sensor but includes a roomId that doesn't actually exist in the system, using an HTTP 422 Unprocessable Entity is way more
semantically accurate than just a standard 404. In most REST APIs, a 404 usually means the actual URL or the endpoint itself is missing, but here, 
the endpoint is fine and the JSON data is formatted correctly. The real problem is that the data inside that JSON is logically "broken" because it's pointing 
to a room that isn't there. By returning a 422, I’m giving the developer a much clearer hint that their request was received and understood, but it just 
can’t be processed because of that specific validation failure. It makes debugging a lot easier for the client compared to getting a generic "not found" error 
which might make them think the whole /sensors path is broken. 

 

4-Question: From a cybersecurity standpoint, explain the risks associated with exposing internal Java stack traces to external API consumers. What specific
information could an attacker gather from such a trace? 

From a cybersecurity standpoint, letting internal Java stack traces leak out to external users is a massive risk because it basically gives an attacker a
"roadmap" of how the server actually works. If something crashes and the API returns a raw error instead of a clean message, an attacker can see things like
specific class names, exactly which library versions I’m using, and even the file paths on the server where the code is sitting. They could then use that info
to target known vulnerabilities in those specific libraries or figure out how to exploit my database logic. By using a "catch-all" ExceptionMapper that just sends
back a generic 500 Internal Server Error, I’m making sure the sensitive details stay hidden and an attacker doesn't get any extra info they could use to plan a
targeted attack. 

 

5-Question: Why is it advantageous to use JAX-RS filters for cross-cutting concerns like logging, rather than manually inserting Logger.info() statements
inside every single re- source method? 
 

 

It’s much better to use JAX-RS filters for things like logging because they handle "cross-cutting concerns" in one single place. If I didn't use a filter,
I’d have to manually paste Logger.info() statements into every single GET, POST, and DELETE method across all my different resource classes. That would be a
total nightmare to maintain, and it’s way too easy to forget one. By using a ContainerRequestFilter and a ContainerResponseFilter, I can automatically intercept
every single request and response that hits the API. It keeps my actual business logic clean and focused, and it guarantees that the logging is consistent
for the whole system without me having to repeat the same code over and over again. 

 
